# Using Flow with Node, directly

Since we are using Flow, and Node doesn't actually know about the data types, there will obviously be problems if we just try to execute our data-typed code. There are two solutions for this: one not so elegant, but that speeds up development, and another more powerful one, but that will require extra work. Let's here consider the first, simpler solution, and leave the second one for the next section.



### How to do it…

It so happens that Flow provides two ways of specifying types: the way that we have been using so far, with extra type notations, and another more verbose one, through the comments. Of course, JS doesn't *know* about type definitions, so the first style won't work unless we do extra work (as we'll see) but using comments is totally safe.

To define types with comments, all Flow specific definitions must be enclosed in comments starting with /*: (note the extra colon) and finishing with the usual */, for simple basic types, or /*:: and */ for everything else. Simple cases are as follows:

```
// Source file: src/flowcomments.js

let someFlag /*: boolean */;
let greatTotal /*: number */;
let firstName /*: string */;

function toString(x /*: number */) /*: string */ {
    return String(x);
}

let traffic /*: "red" | "amber" | "green" */;

// continues...
```

More complex definitions, including optional parameters, types and opaque types, class attributes, and so on, require the longer comments:

```
// ...continued

/*::
type pair<T> = [T, T];
type pairOfNumbers = pair<number>;
type pairOfStrings = pair<string>;

type simpleFlag = number | boolean;

type complexObject = {
    id: string,
    name: string,
    indicator: simpleFlag,
    listOfValues: Array<number>
};
*/

class Person {
    /*::
    first: string;
    last: string;
    */

    constructor(first /*: string */, last /*: string */) {
        this.first = first;
        this.last = last;
    }

    // ...several methods, snipped out
}

// continues...
```

You can also export and import data types:

```
// ...continued

/*::
import type { dniType, nameType } from "./opaque_types";
*/

/*::
export type { pairOfNumbers, pairOfStrings };
*/
```



### How it works…

Why and how does this work? Flow is able to recognize both the /*::  ...  */ and */**:  ...  */ comments, and thus can do its job perfectly well. Since the Flow code is all hidden away in comments, from the point of view of the JS engine, the Flow parts do not even exist, so an obvious advantage of this way of working is that you can directly execute your code.

Why would you *not* like this? The evident criticism is that the code looks, to put it mildly, ugly. If you were used to, say, TypeScript, having to wrap all type-related things in comments can become a chore, and the code will also be harder to read. Also, there is a risk that you'll mistype a comment (forgetting one of those many colons is a possibility) and then Flow will just ignore your definitions, posing a possible risk of letting a bug go through.

Is there an alternative? Yes, there is, but it will require some extra processing, while giving us the benefit of using standard Flow notation; let's turn to that now. 



### Using Flow with Node through preprocessing

Working with comments is a bit overly verbose. If you'd rather work with straightforward type annotations and extra statements, you will have to turn to some preprocessing, to get rid of the Flow paraphernalia before attempting to run your Node code. The good thing with this is that the required processing can be quite efficient, and practically unnoticeable when you develop; let's get into it, and see how we can get to keep Flow definitions, while not breaking our Node code.



### How to do it…

We want to use the shorter, more concise style of Flow, but Node cannot execute code with such additives.The solution to our conundrum is easy: just remove everything related to Flow before attempting to run! There is a package, flow-remove-types, that does just that. To start, as usual, you'll have to install the needed package:

```
npm install flow-remove-types --save-dev
```

To continue, you will have to enable it by adding a new script. We were writing our code in the src/ directory, so let's send the Flow-cleaned output to the out/ directory. In that directory, we will get the version of the code that we will use in our server:

```
"scripts": {
    "build": "flow-remove-types src/ -d out/",
    "addTypes": "flow-typed install",
    "update": "npm install && flow-typed install",
    "flow": "flow",
    .
    .
    .
},
```

To finish, we should also tell Git to ignore the out/ directory. We were already ignoring the node_modulesand flow-typed directories, so let's add one more:

```
**/node_modules 
**/flow-typed 
**/out
```



### How it works...

What will change from the moment you start using flow-remove-types? First, obviously, you cannot just run your project with a simple node src/somefilename.js; first you'll have to strip Flow by npm run build. The effect of this command will be to create a copy in out/, of everything in src/, but without type declarations. Then, you will be able to run the project by doing node out/somefilename.js—filenames won't be changed.

When flow-remove-types package cleans up your files, it replaces all type declarations with whitespaces, so the transformed output files have exactly the same number of lines, and every function starts at exactly the same line as before, removing the need for sourcemaps and keeping the output legible. The following code shows how part of our module from the *Working with modules* section would look after the process:

```
/* @flow */
"use strict";

// These won't be exported:

const roundToCents = (x: number): number => Math.round(x * 100) / 100;

const changeSign = (x: number): number => -x;

// The following will be exported:

const addR = (x: number, y: number): number => roundToCents(x + y);

const subR = (x: number, y: number): number => addR(x, changeSign(y));

const multR = (x: number, y: number): number => roundToCents(x * y);

const divR = (x: number, y: number): number => {
    if (y === 0) {
        throw new Error("Divisor must be nonzero");
    } else {
        return roundToCents(x / y);
    }
};
```



If you would rather have a smaller-sized output (after all, reading code with all those blank spaces can be a bit tiresome) you can produce a source map and remove all spaces, by adding a couple of parameters to your build script, or by adding a different script, as shown in the following code snippet:

```
"scripts": {
    "build": "flow-remove-types src/ -d out/",
    "buildWithMaps": "flow-remove-types src/ -d out/ --pretty --sourcemaps",
    .
    .
    .
},
```

The Node debugger included in VSC fully supports source maps, so producing briefer code won't be a problem.

Now we have a way to keep working with Node and Flow together, but running our code has become just a tad more complex; let's see if we can fix that!